---
layout: post
title: Postdoc opportunity in clade definitions for the Tree of Life
modified:
excerpt: We are looking for a postdoc to research clade definitions
         promoting trait data aggregation and comparative trait
         analysis workflows.
tags: ["postdoc", "jobs"]
image:
  feature:
  teaser: tol_9_19_2011-400x250.jpeg
  thumb:
---

We are seeking a second postdoctoral fellow to support the [Phyloreferencing
project]. Our ideal candidate is a biologist by training, and has
strong expertise in systematic biology. The focus of your work would
be on working with select [NSF GoLife] projects to develop meaningful
phyloreferences and to use these in proof-of-concept applications for
aggregating trait and other domain-relevant data. In addition, you
would work with the [ARBOR] project to research integrating
phyloreferences into trait-based analysis and visualization workflows.

The Phyloreferencing project is a collaboration between Dr. Nico
Cellinese (Florida Museum of Natural History, University of Florida)
and Hilmar Lapp (Center for Genomic and Computational Biology, Duke
University) newly funded by the National Science Foundation. The
postdoc will be based in the lab of Dr. Cellinese, but will work
closely with both PIs. Starting date is negotiable. Salary is $50,000.

## Why phyloreferencing?

The ability to freely and precisely communicate organism-linked data
suffers serious limitations from the traditionally used taxon names
based in Linnaean nomenclature. The semantics of such names are
too often ambiguous, subject to divergent interpretation, and
unavailable to computation. And with the advent of next-generation
sequencing, metagenomics, and other modern biological data collection
technologies, many groups of organisms for which we have interesting
data do not yet, and may never have a Linnaean name.

Our project aims to overcome these limitations by defining
ontology-based references (phyloreferences) to elements on the Tree of
Life that are unambiguous and the semantics of which are amenable to
powerful machine reasoning. One of the foundations of phyloreferencing
is formed by the decades of theoretical and applied work on
phylogenetic taxonomy. Ongoing computational work involves researching
and developing OWL models and ontologies, tools for converting
existing data into OWL format, and online proof-of-concept
applications for using machine reasoning to navigate biodiversity data
by clade semantics.

You can read the full grant proposal at <http://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.1401984>.

## Postdoctoral project responsibilities

You will work closely with the project PIs, [existing postdoc] and
graduate students to generate the major project deliverables, focus on
extending proof-of-concept tools to data integration use-cases beyond
the Open Tree of Life project as the main phylogeny
provider. Specifically, you will work with other projects funded by
NSF’s [GoLife program][NSF GoLife] to obtain large phylogenies, gather
sources for meaningful phyloreferences, and develop phyloreferencing
proof-of-concept applications for these. These applications will
include aggregating trait and other domain-relevant data. You will
also work with the [ARBOR Evolutionary Workflows][ARBOR] project to prototype
ways for integrating phyloreferences into trait-based analysis and
visualization workflows that can be executed within the ARBOR
framework.

While working with us on this project, you will gain familiarity with
ontology development and ontology-enabled applications, including
generating phyloreferences at a Tree-of-Life scale. You will also have
the opportunity to explore, develop and test alternative approaches to
clade definitions at every taxonomic level and at the broadest
possible scales. You will have opportunities to publish both empirical
and theoretical work.

## Qualifications:

* PhD in Biology or a related field. 
* Strong background in Systematic Biology required. You should be well
  versed in all aspects of theoretical phylogenetics and related
  topics.
* Programming experience in languages frequently used in scientific
  computing and for managing or converting scientific data (e.g.,
  Python) is useful (and thus preferred) but not required.
* Excellent communication and writing skills, and ability to interact
  productively with other projects’ PIs and personnel.

## How to apply:

Please submit a letter of interest and CV, together with the names and
contact information of three academic references, to Dr. Nico
Cellinese (<mailto:ncellinese@flmnh.ufl.edu>). All other inquiries should also
be directed to Dr. Cellinese. The position will remain open until
filled.

_The University of Florida is an Equal Opportunity Employer._

[Phyloreferencing project]: http://phyloref.org
[existing postdoc]: {% post_url /blog/2016-07-20-welcoming-gaurav %}
[NSF GoLife]: https://www.nsf.gov/funding/pgm_summ.jsp?pims_id=5129
[ARBOR]: http://arborworkflows.com
