---
layout: post
title: Taxonomic resolution services review (1) - Concept taxonomy and Avibase
author: gyzhang
modified:
excerpt: A report of our second face-to-face project meeting in Gainesville from Oct 11-12, 2017.
tags: ["development plan", "project plan", "project meeting"]
published: true
comments: true
image:
  feature: 
  teaser: tol_9_19_2011-400x250.jpeg
  thumb: 
---

Concept taxonomy: Augmenting precision of names and aligning multiple taxonomies
Concept taxonomy, developed by a handful of researchers through the course of more than 20 years, takes a quite different approach [than those of existing methods, such as name resolution/cleaning services, ontology, etc]. When a taxonomic name is used, the concept of a taxon that the name points to is explicitly referenced by citing the publication that circumscribes the taxon. Initially motivated by the problem of linking data to taxonomic names in botanical specimen databases, Berendsohn (1995) introduced the notion of “potential taxon”, which refers to a taxonomic “name with taxon circumscription information attached to it”. He proposed that a potential taxon be cited by its name, followed by “sec.” (for secundum = according to) and the reference that defines the name. In subsequent years, Franz, Ludäscher and colleagues further developed the concept taxonomy approach (Franz et al. 2008, Franz & Peet 2009, Franz et al. 2015, Jansen and Franz 2015, Franz et al. 2016). Jansen and Franz (2015) introduced the term “taxonomic concept label” to refer to the “name sec. author [year]” format used to cite a specific usage of a taxonomic name (Berendsohn 1995). For example, in Franz et al. (2016), two taxonomic concept labels were used to refer to two concepts or usages of the name “Primates”, i.e., Primates sec. Groves (1993) and Primates sec. Groves (2005). [Elaborate these labels] The relationship between taxonomic concepts employed by different authors or in different taxonomies can be articulated as congruent, inclusive or disjunct. A human curator, typically somebody who is knowledgeable of or capable of learning the pertinent taxonomic literature specifies these articulations. Chen et al. (2014) developed a computer program called Euler/X that aligns taxonomic concepts. Euler/X takes a set of pairs of concept articulations and reason over them. This process is called taxonomic concept alignment. The outcome is a merged taxonomic concept map. One benefit of the concept taxonomy approach is that taxonomic concept labels and articulations enable data communication and integration for both humans and computers (although a demonstration for the latter is not yet available). If all biodiversity data are anchored to taxonomic concept labels and their relationship articulations specified, it may be possible to create a seamless biodiversity map that integrates data with high precision and resolution. 
  - Taxonomic concept label - “Taxonomic name” “Original author of the taxonomy name (optional)” “sec.” “publication (author year) that specifies the usage or concept of the name” (Square brackets “[]” are used to delimit the three sections and not actually written out)
Currently the most common approach in integrating specimen data is essentially a “consensus taxonomy” approach, where multiple sources of data are aggregated, with every and any taxonomic names provided by the data suppliers harvested, regardless of the underlying concepts of the names. In contrast, the same specimen data could be mapped using three different taxonomies, each reflecting a somewhat different understanding of the taxonomy of this group, resulting in different distribution patterns. 
So how could concept taxonomy be used to integrate data of this sort? Specimen records are associated with taxonomic concept labels (name + sec.) and concept alignment is used to integrate the records. The orchid test case of using concept taxonomy to integrate specimen data is still quite rudimentary. These specimens only concern concepts that are congruent, and the example did not demonstrate specimen integration when it comes to taxonomic concepts with other kinds of relationships (i.e., overlapping and exclusion).

Challenges and limitations faced by concept taxonomy. By augmenting the precision of taxonomic names, the concept taxonomy approach holds great promise for achieving better biodiversity data integration, but we perceive several challenges or limitations facing it. (1) Articulating concept relationships is an entirely manual [human] exercise and it requires expert knowledge. While it is hoped that biologists will adopt the labeling format of concept taxonomy in the future, it is a daunting, if not impossible, task to annotate and curate more than 250 years of biological literature that contains just taxonomic names (versus taxonomic concept labels). (2) Concept usage of taxonomic names used in various contexts, including specimen identification labels [and more], are often untraceable. (3) Actual application in data integration has not yet been demonstrated [none so far except for the Apodrogon grass specimen distributions use case given in a grant proposal, which was done manually, with different concepts specified. This is not necessarily a challenge, just something that they haven’t quite worked on yet, but without demonstration of concept taxonomy’s ability to integrate data, it would be hard to convince the community]. (4) Reliance on Linnaean taxonomic names and inapplicable to clades that are not formalized [not entirely sure about this].


  Lepage et al. (2014) pointed out several limitations of the taxonomic concept approach, including (1) relationships between taxonomic concepts are not always well-understood, (2) the number of concepts far exceeds number of names, (3) difficult to scale up (pairwise concept comparisons from potentially hundreds of sources)
  

The Avibase approach
Avibase for a complete description from the architect and engineer of Avibase). This is an extensive taxonomic and biodiversity database of all birds. More than 844,000 species-level and 705,000 subspecies-level taxonomic concepts are curated based on 151 taxonomic checklists published in the last 125 years by 17 different authorities. Why curate different taxonomies and why not simply use a consensus taxonomy? For one reason, regional taxonomic differences are prevalent and persistent. Only about half, or 4,451 combinations (binomials) occur across all 70 global checklists, which means more than half of species names are different from one list to another. What is even worse, nearly no taxonomic names are used with exactly the same (congruent) circumscription across all 151 checklists. This happens only for 11 of the 19,260 unique combinations of circumscriptions and scientific names (having both the same exact name and the same Avibase ID or circumscription). So the precision of communication about the knowledge of birds using scientific names alone is undermined by this prevalent and persistent divergence in taxonomic views and treatments. Reconciling local taxonomic differences and aggregating biodiversity data from diverse sources at a global scale is thus a huge challenge. How does Avibase handle this challenge?

In Avibase each occurrence of a name in a checklist is curated as a separate taxonomic concept, akin to the practice of Concept Taxonomy. Individual taxonomic concepts that have congruent circumscriptions are grouped into the same “circumscription cluster”. Each cluster is given an Avibase ID, and all biodiversity data pertaining to a cluster is aggregated and associated with that ID. Essentially, biodiversity data is not directly attached to species names, thus alleviating issues of ambiguity around names. This also means that the same cluster may contain different taxonomic names if they share a congruent circumscription, or one name can be placed in different clusters, if its circumscription varies among authorities (checklists). Quoting Lepage et al, “For instance, the names Francolinus gariepensis, Francolinus levaillantoides, Francolinus levaillantoides, Scleroptila gutturalis and Scleroptila levaillantoidescan all refer to a congruent circumscription cluster (Avibase ID 8E833C63E70A547C), whereas the name Puffinus lherminieri can refer to up to 12 distinct circumscriptions”. In Avibase taxonomic concepts are related through a concept tree, but it is not the concepts per se that are mapped on the tree, rather it is the Avibase IDs or circumscription clusters. The primary relationship is the inclusion, where one concept cluster may include one or more other clusters.

Does Avibase have limitations? Yes. An obvious missing component is higher-level taxonomic names or concepts, which are not managed by Avibase. As Lepage et al. explains, higher-level names are difficult to manage as the number of possible combinations of children is potentially very large. As a result, queries cannot be performed using higher-level taxonomic names. One can browse the database by family and the classification follows Howard and Moore. Another issue is interoperability. 
